README.md, before:

[ja](./README.ja.md)

# Python.sqlite3.row_factory.tuple.sqlite3row.namedtuple.dataclass.__getitem__

Thin wrapper that returns SQLite3 select result as tuple, sqlite3.Row, namedtuple, dataclass.

<!--

# DEMO

* [demo](https://ytyaru.github.io/Python.Python.sqlite3.row_factory.tuple.sqlite3row.namedtuple.dataclass.__getitem__.20221017181058/)

![img](https://github.com/ytyaru/Python.Python.sqlite3.row_factory.tuple.sqlite3row.namedtuple.dataclass.__getitem__.20221017181058/blob/master/doc/0.png?raw=true)

# Features

* sales point

-->

# Requirement

* <time datetime="2022-10-17T18:10:37+0900">2022-10-17</time>
* [Raspbierry Pi](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raspberry_Pi) 4 Model B Rev 1.2
* [Raspberry Pi OS](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raspbian) buster 10.0 2020-08-20 <small>[setup](http://ytyaru.hatenablog.com/entry/2020/10/06/111111)</small>
* bash 5.0.3(1)-release
* Python 3.10.5

<!-- * Python 2.7.16 -->

```sh
$ uname -a
Linux raspberrypi 5.10.103-v7l+ #1529 SMP Tue Mar 8 12:24:00 GMT 2022 armv7l GNU/Linux
```

# Installation

## anyenv

```sh
git clone https://github.com/anyenv/anyenv ~/.anyenv
echo 'export PATH="$HOME/.anyenv/bin:$PATH"' >> ~/.bash_profile
echo 'eval "$(anyenv init -)"' >> ~/.bash_profile
anyenv install --init -y
```

## pyenv

```sh
anyenv install pyenv
exec $SHELL -l
```

## python

```sh
sudo apt install -y libsqlite3-dev libbz2-dev libncurses5-dev libgdbm-dev liblzma-dev libssl-dev tcl-dev tk-dev libreadline-dev
```

```sh
pyenv install -l
```
```sh
pyenv install 3.10.5
```


## this works

```sh
git clone https://github.com/ytyaru/Python.Python.sqlite3.row_factory.tuple.sqlite3row.namedtuple.dataclass.__getitem__.20221017181058
cd Python.Python.sqlite3.row_factory.tuple.sqlite3row.namedtuple.dataclass.__getitem__.20221017181058/src
```

# Usage

## unit test

```sh
cd Python.sqlite3.row_factory.namedtuple.__getitem__.20221016095117/src
./test-ntlite.py
```

## import

```python
from ntlite import NtLite
```

## new

```python
db = NtLite() # :memory:
```
```python
db = NtLite('./db/my.sqlite3')
```
```python
db = NtLite('./db/my.sqlite3', RowTypes.dataclass)
```
```python
db = NtLite(path='./db/my.sqlite3', row_type=RowTypes.dataclass)
```

### RowTypes

RowTypes|column reference
--------|----------------
`RowTypes.tuple`|`row[0]`
`RowTypes.sqlite3row`([sqlite3.Row][])|`row[0]`, `row['col_name']`
`RowTypes.namedtuple`|`row[0]`, `row.col_name`, `row['col_name']`
`RowTypes.dataclass`|`row[0]`, `row.col_name`, `row['col_name']`

By specifying RowTypes it is possible to specify the types of rows returned from the DB table. Implemented with [row_factory][].

#### RowTypes params

The following two have parameters.

```python
RowTypes.namedtuple(not_getitem=True)
```

```python
RowTypes.namedtuple(not_getitem=True, not_slot=True, not_frozen=True)
```

parameter|`namedtuple`|`dataclass`
---------|------------|-----------
`not_getitem`=`True`|Cannot be referenced by `['col_name']` | Cannot be referenced by `[0]` or `['col_name']`
`not_slot`=`True`|-|Cannot register new properties
`not_frozen`=`True`|-|Become mutable (be able to set values to properties)

　`NtLite`を生成するとき以下のように渡す。

```python
db = NtLite(row_type=RowTypes.namedtuple(not_getitem=True))
db = NtLite(row_type=RowTypes.dataclass(not_slot=False, not_frozen=False))
```

## API

method|call sqlite3 method
------|-------------------
`exec`|[execute][]
`execm`|[executemany][]
`execs`|[executescript][]
`get`|[execute][] + [fetchone][]
`gets`|[execute][] + [fetchall][]

[execute]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Cursor.execute
[executemany]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Cursor.executemany
[executescript]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Connection.executescript
[fetchone]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Cursor.fetchone
[fetchall]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Cursor.fetchall
[fetchmany]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Cursor.fetchmany

## reference column

```python
row = db.get("select id, name num from users where id=5;")
row.id    #=> 5
row['id'] #=> 5
row[0]    #=> 5
```

RowTypes|column reference
--------|----------------
`RowTypes.tuple`|`row[0]`
`RowTypes.sqlite3row`([sqlite3.Row][])|`row[0]`, `row['col_name']`
`RowTypes.namedtuple`|`row[0]`, `row.col_name`, `row['col_name']`
`RowTypes.dataclass`|`row[0]`, `row.col_name`, `row['col_name']`

[namedtuple ver]:https://github.com/ytyaru/Python.sqlite3.row_factory.namedtuple.20221015151253
[namedtuple + getitem ver]:https://github.com/ytyaru/Python.sqlite3.row_factory.namedtuple.__getitem__.20221016095117
[dataclass + getitem ver]:https://github.com/ytyaru/Python.sqlite3.row_factory.dataclass.20221016164153

[sqlite3]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html
[row_factory]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Connection.row_factory
[sqlite3.Row]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Row
[__getitem__]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/reference/datamodel.html#object.__getitem__
[cursor.description]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Cursor.description
[namedtuple]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/collections.html#collections.namedtuple
[dataclass]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/dataclasses.html
[mypy]:https://github.com/python/mypy

## example

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python3
# coding: utf8
import os
from ntlite import NtLite
path = 'my.db'
if os.path.isfile(path): os.remove(path)
db = NtLite(path)
db.exec("create table users(id integer, name text);")
db.execm("insert into users values(?,?);", [(0,'A'),(1,'B')])
assert 2 == db.get("select count(*) num from users;").num
rows = db.gets("select * from users;")
assert 0   == rows[0].id
assert 'A' == rows[0].name
assert 1   == rows[1].id
assert 'B' == rows[1].name

assert 0   == rows[0]['id']
assert 'A' == rows[0]['name']
assert 1   == rows[1]['id']
assert 'B' == rows[1]['name']

assert 0   == rows[0][0]
assert 'A' == rows[0][1]
assert 1   == rows[1][0]
assert 'B' == rows[1][1]
```


<!--

# Note

* important point

-->

# Author

ytyaru

* [![github](http://www.google.com/s2/favicons?domain=github.com)](https://github.com/ytyaru "github")
* [![hatena](http://www.google.com/s2/favicons?domain=www.hatena.ne.jp)](http://ytyaru.hatenablog.com/ytyaru "hatena")
* [![twitter](http://www.google.com/s2/favicons?domain=twitter.com)](https://twitter.com/ytyaru1 "twitter")
* [![mastodon](http://www.google.com/s2/favicons?domain=mstdn.jp)](https://mstdn.jp/web/accounts/233143 "mastdon")

# License

This software is CC0 licensed.

[![CC0](http://i.creativecommons.org/p/zero/1.0/88x31.png "CC0")](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/deed.en)

Commit message:

4種のRowType継承型をRowTypesに集約した。DataClassRowTypeのnot_slots, not_frozenを実装した。テストケースを追加した。

README.md, after:

[ja](./README.ja.md)

# Python.sqlite3.row_factory.tuple.sqlite3row.namedtuple.dataclass.__getitem__

Thin wrapper that returns SQLite3 select result as tuple, sqlite3.Row, namedtuple, dataclass.

<!--

# DEMO

* [demo](https://ytyaru.github.io/Python.Python.sqlite3.row_factory.tuple.sqlite3row.namedtuple.dataclass.__getitem__.20221017181058/)

![img](https://github.com/ytyaru/Python.Python.sqlite3.row_factory.tuple.sqlite3row.namedtuple.dataclass.__getitem__.20221017181058/blob/master/doc/0.png?raw=true)

# Features

* sales point

-->

# Requirement

* <time datetime="2022-10-17T18:10:37+0900">2022-10-17</time>
* [Raspbierry Pi](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raspberry_Pi) 4 Model B Rev 1.2
* [Raspberry Pi OS](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raspbian) buster 10.0 2020-08-20 <small>[setup](http://ytyaru.hatenablog.com/entry/2020/10/06/111111)</small>
* bash 5.0.3(1)-release
* Python 3.10.5

<!-- * Python 2.7.16 -->

```sh
$ uname -a
Linux raspberrypi 5.10.103-v7l+ #1529 SMP Tue Mar 8 12:24:00 GMT 2022 armv7l GNU/Linux
```

# Installation

## anyenv

```sh
git clone https://github.com/anyenv/anyenv ~/.anyenv
echo 'export PATH="$HOME/.anyenv/bin:$PATH"' >> ~/.bash_profile
echo 'eval "$(anyenv init -)"' >> ~/.bash_profile
anyenv install --init -y
```

## pyenv

```sh
anyenv install pyenv
exec $SHELL -l
```

## python

```sh
sudo apt install -y libsqlite3-dev libbz2-dev libncurses5-dev libgdbm-dev liblzma-dev libssl-dev tcl-dev tk-dev libreadline-dev
```

```sh
pyenv install -l
```
```sh
pyenv install 3.10.5
```


## this works

```sh
git clone https://github.com/ytyaru/Python.Python.sqlite3.row_factory.tuple.sqlite3row.namedtuple.dataclass.__getitem__.20221017181058
cd Python.Python.sqlite3.row_factory.tuple.sqlite3row.namedtuple.dataclass.__getitem__.20221017181058/src
```

# Usage

## unit test

```sh
cd Python.sqlite3.row_factory.namedtuple.__getitem__.20221016095117/src
./test-ntlite.py
```

## import

```python
from ntlite import NtLite
```

## new

```python
db = NtLite() # :memory:
```
```python
db = NtLite('./db/my.sqlite3')
```
```python
db = NtLite('./db/my.sqlite3', RowTypes.dataclass)
```
```python
db = NtLite(path='./db/my.sqlite3', row_type=RowTypes.dataclass)
```

### RowTypes

RowTypes|column reference
--------|----------------
`RowTypes.tuple`|`row[0]`
`RowTypes.sqlite3`([sqlite3.Row][])|`row[0]`, `row['col_name']`
`RowTypes.namedtuple`|`row[0]`, `row.col_name`, `row['col_name']`
`RowTypes.dataclass`|`row[0]`, `row.col_name`, `row['col_name']`

By specifying RowTypes it is possible to specify the types of rows returned from the DB table. Implemented with [row_factory][].

#### RowTypes params

The following two have parameters.

```python
RowTypes.namedtuple(not_getitem=True)
```

```python
RowTypes.namedtuple(not_getitem=True, not_slot=True, not_frozen=True)
```

parameter|`namedtuple`|`dataclass`
---------|------------|-----------
`not_getitem`=`True`|Cannot be referenced by `['col_name']` | Cannot be referenced by `[0]` or `['col_name']`
`not_slots`=`True`|-|Cannot register new properties
`not_frozen`=`True`|-|Become mutable (be able to set values to properties)

All default to `False`.

When generating `NtLite` pass it as follows.

```python
db = NtLite(row_type=RowTypes.namedtuple(not_getitem=True))
db = NtLite(row_type=RowTypes.dataclass(not_getitem=True, not_slots=True, not_frozen=True))
```

## API

method|call sqlite3 method
------|-------------------
`exec`|[execute][]
`execm`|[executemany][]
`execs`|[executescript][]
`get`|[execute][] + [fetchone][]
`gets`|[execute][] + [fetchall][]

[execute]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Cursor.execute
[executemany]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Cursor.executemany
[executescript]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Connection.executescript
[fetchone]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Cursor.fetchone
[fetchall]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Cursor.fetchall
[fetchmany]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Cursor.fetchmany

## reference column

```python
row = db.get("select id, name num from users where id=5;")
row.id    #=> 5
row['id'] #=> 5
row[0]    #=> 5
```

RowTypes|column reference
--------|----------------
`RowTypes.tuple`|`row[0]`
`RowTypes.sqlite3row`([sqlite3.Row][])|`row[0]`, `row['col_name']`
`RowTypes.namedtuple`|`row[0]`, `row.col_name`, `row['col_name']`
`RowTypes.dataclass`|`row[0]`, `row.col_name`, `row['col_name']`

[namedtuple ver]:https://github.com/ytyaru/Python.sqlite3.row_factory.namedtuple.20221015151253
[namedtuple + getitem ver]:https://github.com/ytyaru/Python.sqlite3.row_factory.namedtuple.__getitem__.20221016095117
[dataclass + getitem ver]:https://github.com/ytyaru/Python.sqlite3.row_factory.dataclass.20221016164153

[sqlite3]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html
[row_factory]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Connection.row_factory
[sqlite3.Row]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Row
[__getitem__]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/reference/datamodel.html#object.__getitem__
[cursor.description]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/sqlite3.html#sqlite3.Cursor.description
[namedtuple]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/collections.html#collections.namedtuple
[dataclass]:https://docs.python.org/ja/3/library/dataclasses.html
[mypy]:https://github.com/python/mypy

## example

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python3
# coding: utf8
import os
from ntlite import NtLite
path = 'my.db'
if os.path.isfile(path): os.remove(path)
db = NtLite(path)
db.exec("create table users(id integer, name text);")
db.execm("insert into users values(?,?);", [(0,'A'),(1,'B')])
assert 2 == db.get("select count(*) num from users;").num
rows = db.gets("select * from users;")
assert 0   == rows[0].id
assert 'A' == rows[0].name
assert 1   == rows[1].id
assert 'B' == rows[1].name

assert 0   == rows[0]['id']
assert 'A' == rows[0]['name']
assert 1   == rows[1]['id']
assert 'B' == rows[1]['name']

assert 0   == rows[0][0]
assert 'A' == rows[0][1]
assert 1   == rows[1][0]
assert 'B' == rows[1][1]
```


<!--

# Note

* important point

-->

# Author

ytyaru

* [![github](http://www.google.com/s2/favicons?domain=github.com)](https://github.com/ytyaru "github")
* [![hatena](http://www.google.com/s2/favicons?domain=www.hatena.ne.jp)](http://ytyaru.hatenablog.com/ytyaru "hatena")
* [![twitter](http://www.google.com/s2/favicons?domain=twitter.com)](https://twitter.com/ytyaru1 "twitter")
* [![mastodon](http://www.google.com/s2/favicons?domain=mstdn.jp)](https://mstdn.jp/web/accounts/233143 "mastdon")

# License

This software is CC0 licensed.

[![CC0](http://i.creativecommons.org/p/zero/1.0/88x31.png "CC0")](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/deed.en)
